---
layout: default
title: RECOMMENDATIONS AND SOLUTIONS 
parent: § Undersea Cables - The Ultimate Geopolitical Chokepoint  
grand_parent: U
nav_order: 40 
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

     -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}

.youtube-container {
    position: relative;
    width: 100%;
    height: 0;
    padding-bottom: 56.25%;
}
.youtube-video {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
}

</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">

1. TOC
{:toc}

## RECOMMENDATIONS AND SOLUTIONS
The past year has seen the world become familiar with the disastrous economic, national security and public health implications of infectious disease has demonstrated by the Coronavirus pandemic. It is now time for world opinion to become aware of the economic and national security implications of losing access to the information transmitted by undersea cables. Cable information and data transmission have gone from the initial 17 hours and 40 minutes it took to transmit messages between President Buchanan and Queen Victoria to the fastest cables transferring data at speed of nearly 25 terabytes per second, which is twice the amount of the annual data generated by the Hubble Space Telescope. <sup>61</sup>

Losing such access for even a short amount of time would have asphyxiating consequences, which would cascade across the globe and take a long time to work around and overcome. Undersea cables and their geoeconomic and geopolitical criticality involve Mahan’s emphasis on command of the sea, Corbett’s on seapower’s critical communication requirements, Mackinder’s on the importance of the Eurasian heartland, and Spykman’s emphasis on the rimland’s strategic importance. <sup>62</sup> Numerous works of varying quality and perspectives and numerous international strategic trends, exacerbated by the Coronavirus pandemic, are placing increasing emphasis on the vulnerability of the U.S. and its maritime allies to supply chain disruptions and hostility from countries as varied as China, Iran, North Korea, and Russia. Some of these works are beginning to recognize the vitally important role undersea cables play in our emerging geoeconomic, geopolitical, and strategic environment and urge the U.S. and its maritime allies to take a more assertive stance against the powers threatening the international geopolitical order. <sup>63</sup>

Despite the acute physical and social strain imposed by the Coronavirus, there are several steps political, technical, and military steps democratic countries can take individually to ensure the stable and uninterrupted flow of information and data through undersea cables. These include:

### POLITICAL
Exploring the possibility of driving a wedge between Russia and China by emphasizing how Russia’s ties with Vietnam puts Moscow in potential with Beijing over South China Sea maritime disputes and
access to energy resources.

Promote more transparency, oversight, and standards into the Maritime Silk Road and the Belt and Road Initiative while emphasizing that the lack of such transparency could produce attempts by Beijing and its allies to attack critical undersea cables as a means of gaining coercive geopolitical advantage. An attribute of this would be working to ensure that companies under Chinese and Russian leverage such as Rostelecom and Huawei are thwarted in their attempts to gain influence in democratic maritime countries, which could be used to further Beijing’s and Moscow’s interests. Maritime countries should also use the American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation’s China Global Investment Tracker as a template to counter Chinese influence on undersea cable infrastructure investment by avoiding cable companies having ties with Chinese or Russian cable firms, which could result in use of these cables being curtailed or severed.

Australia, European countries, India, Japan, and the U.S. using economic development as a means of exerting geoeconomic and geopolitical leverage to dissuade nations from favoring Chinese and Russian efforts to restrict the free flow of information and strategic communications through undersea cables. <sup>64</sup>

### POLITICAL/MILITARY
The U.S. supporting partners and allied nations such as Japan through multilateral exercises, advanced technological transfers, weapons sales, and greater intelligence sharing to preempt potential attempts to seize control of undersea cables.

NATO and its Allied Maritime Command must transition from a Eurocentric maritime orientation to expand its operations into the Atlantic and Mediterranean to protect against potential threats to submarine cables.

Encourage India to expand its emphasis on homeland defense to include maritime operations and capability including engagement with countries such as Indonesia, the Philippines, and Vietnam to increase their commitment to securing undersea cable communications.

### TECHNICAL
The importance of powers outside of China and Russia thinking of how undersea cables secure, store, and share information from one location to the next. Private sector accomplishment of maritime cybersecurity for national security is to large to be accomplished without governmental involvement. Controlling key information flows originating in the global undersea fiber optic cable networks is critical for strategic victory in multiple future conflict scenarios. This also applies to U.S. Navy missional and operational objectives in the critical IndoPacom region.<sup>65</sup>

### MILITARY
Training U.S. and allied maritime forces in monitoring and repairing undersea cables. Increasing lethality of ships in U.S. Cable Security Program and liberalizing rules of engagement for crews of these ships to use deadly force against hostile actors trying to disrupt or destroy submarine cables. Assigning at least one cable repair ship to regions covered by U.S. geographic unified military combatant commands is highly desirable.

### TECHNICAL/MILITARY
Training U.S. and allied maritime forces in monitoring and repairing undersea cables. Increasing lethality of ships in U.S. Cable Security Program and liberalizing rules of engagement for crews of these ships to use deadly force against hostile actors trying to disrupt or destroy submarine cables. Assigning at least one cable repair ship to regions covered by U.S. geographic unified military combatant commands is highly desirable.

Steps for enhancing undersea cable security include incorporating assessments of attacks on undersea cable infrastructure and best practices for responding to such attacks into national military strategy documents. Conducting national risk assessments and establishing a national risk register to identify undersea cable risks to maritime countries. Including secure cable landing sites into national critical infrastructure facilities and incorporate necessary security measures. Establishing Cable Protection Zones such as Australia’s around coastal areas with highvalue communications corridors. Deploy better monitoring on cables by requiring private sector contractors to place sensors capable of detecting sonar frequencies near key undersea infrastructure and along cable routes.

### TECHNICAL/POLITICAL
Promote greater geographic diversity of undersea cables and increase criminal penalties for disrupting or destroying such cables. Increase building of backup systems to promote resiliency and redundancy. Consider pushing for a new international treaty to protect undersea cables with stiff penalties for disrupting and destroying them. Such an agreement is only realistically possible among democratic maritime nations since authoritarian nations would not be honest brokers in enforcing such agreements. Increase naval exercises involving undersea cables and regularly review maritime capabilities among NATO and other global democracies. Make it clear that maritime countries will not tolerate attacks upon this critical infrastructure and are willing to use military force against those attacking undersea cables. <sup>66</sup>

It is also essential for national security leaders in the world’s democratic countries to repeatedly educate their residents on the critical importance of undersea cables to national economic and strategic interests. This is not likely under the Biden Administration, but congressional leaders and national security analysts concerned with this subject must take the lead in this endeavor until the U.S. has a presidential administration that takes this matter seriously. Other countries must also take the lead in stressing the importance of this subject and the need to protect this vital infrastructure. Failure to rectify these deficiencies and educate the public could result in a cyber Pearl Harbor/911 cataclysm that will be extremely difficult to recover from and make the Coronavirus’ discomfort and disruption seem minor.

***

#### Table of Contents
{: .no_toc}

<ul><li> <a href="/docs/U/Undersea-Cables-The-Ultimate-Geopolitical-Chokepoint-1/">
OVERVIEW AND HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/U/Undersea-Cables-The-Ultimate-Geopolitical-Chokepoint-2/">
POLICYMAKING & LEGISLATION</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/U/Undersea-Cables-The-Ultimate-Geopolitical-Chokepoint-3/">
INFRASTRUCTURE DISRUPTION & DAMAGE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/U/Undersea-Cables-The-Ultimate-Geopolitical-Chokepoint-4/">
RECOMMENDATIONS AND SOLUTIONS</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/U/Undersea-Cables-The-Ultimate-Geopolitical-Chokepoint-5/">
APPENDIX</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/U/Undersea-Cables-The-Ultimate-Geopolitical-Chokepoint-6/">
REFERENCES</a></li></ul>
***

</div>
